Contributions
=========================================================

Author contributions are reported following the CRediT Contributor Roles:

Conceptualization: G.N., R.B.-N., S.A., A.D.L.V., O.E., J.A.E., Y.O.H., P.H., A.K., C.M., C.R.P., F.P., N.Q., A.S.W., and J.W.R. Project administration: G.N., R.B.-N., and J.W.R. Supervision: G.N., R.B.-N., and J.W.R. Writing - original draft: G.N., R.B.-N., S.A., A.D.L.V., O.E., J.A.E., K.F., M.G., Y.O.H., P.H., A.K., D.B.K., C.M., C.R.P., F.P., N.Q., T.S., A.S.W., and J.W.R. Writing - review & editing: G.N., R.B.-N., S.A., A.D.L.V., O.E., J.A.E., K.F., M.G., R.G., Y.O.H., P.H., A.K., D.B.K., C.M., C.J.M., C.R.P., F.P., N.Q., T.S., W.S., A.S.W., K.J.W., and J.W.R.

## Acknowledgements

G.N. was supported by the AXA Research Fund and by NIH CRCNS: US-France Data Sharing Proposal (NIBIB (USA) R01 EB030896 and ANR-20-NEUC-0004-01). R.B-N. is an Awardee of the Weizmann Institute of Science -Israel National Postdoctoral Award Program for Advancing Women in Science. A.d.l.V was supported by NIH grant 5R01MH109682. O.E. was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) Project 185872 and NIMH grant (RF1MH121867, O.E.). J.A.E was supported by NIH grant R37MH066078 to Todd S. Braver. K.F. was supported by the Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange (the Bekker programme; PPN/BEK/2020/1/00279/U/00001). M.G. was supported by the Elsass foundation (18-3-0147). Y.O.H. was supported by NIH grant 1P41EB019936-01A1. P.H. was supported in parts by funding from the Canada First Research Excellence Fund, awarded to McGill University for the Healthy Brains for Healthy Lives initiative, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) NIH-NIBIB P41 EB019936 (ReproNim), the National Institute Of Mental Health of the NIH under Award  Number  R01MH096906, a research scholar award from Brain Canada, in partnership with Health Canada, for the Canadian Open Neuroscience Platform initiative, as well as an Excellence Scholarship from Unifying Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence - Québec. A.K. was supported by the TransMedTech Institute Postdoc Fellowship. D.B.K. was supported by the National Institute of Mental Health under grant RF1 MH120021 (PI: Keator), and acknowledges the International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility (INCF). C.R.P. was supported by the Novo Nordisk Fonden NNF20OC0063277. F.P. is supported by NSF grants IIS 1636893, IIS 1912270, and BCS 1734853, NIH National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB) grant 1R01EB029272, NIH NIMH 1R01MH126699, and a Microsoft Investigator Fellowship. N.Q. acknowledges the NIDM-Terms grant (National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH) grant 1RF1MH120021 PI: David B Keator). K.J.W. was supported by The UKRI Strategic Priorities Fund under EPSRC Grant EP/T001569/1, particularly the "Tools, Practices and Systems" theme within that grant, and by The Alan Turing Institute under the EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1. J.W.R. was supported by the DFG Device Center Grant INST 184/216-1 “Tools and infrastructure for open and reproducible neuroimaging”, and the DFG grant 390895286 of the Excellence Strategy (EXC 2177/1, Hearing4All).
